[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
You know, we have
many incredible guests
on this program, and
we have over the years.
But in this program
today, we're going
to talk with an individual
who is on the cutting
edge of where we
will be in terms
of the future of humanity.
His name is Daniel Pinchbeck.
He's the bestselling
author of "Breaking
Open the Head," "2012, The
Return of Quetzalcoatl,"
and "How Soon is Now?"
And his new book is called
"When Plants Dream."
He's featured in the
2010 documentary,
"2012, Time for Change."
And he's one of the most
incredible human minds
I've ever talked to.
Daniel, welcome to
"Beyond Belief."
>>DANIEL PINCHBECK: Yeah, thank
you for those nice accolades.
>>NOORY: How've you been?
>>PINCHBECK: I've been
good-- good, yeah.
>>NOORY: Boy, this planet
continues to change and evolve,
doesn't it?
>>PINCHBECK: It seems
like it's doing something.
>>NOORY: You have looked at what
we call ecological emergencies
on this planet.
What do you mean by that?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
Well, I mean, it's
not just me obviously.
The UN just issued
a report recently
saying that we had
about 10 to 12 years
to make a major shift
in the amount of CO2
that we're producing
if we are going
to avoid catastrophic
warming and temperature rise.
And many scientists
already believe
that it's too late to prevent
really catastrophic effects.
>>NOORY: Are we in an earth
cycle, or is this all man-made?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, yeah, I
think that's a good question.
Maybe some of both,
but we definitely
can attribute it
to human causes.
I know there are
some commentators who
still argue against that.
But you know, we put
a million tons of CO2
into the atmosphere every hour.
We can measure the amount
of CO2 in the atmosphere.
We know the impact
that we're having.
So a lot of what we're
doing is pretty clear--
I mean, also deforestation.
And then we're seeing forest
fires around the world.
So even now, I think we're 1.2
Celsius warmer, or something
like that, than we were
in pre-industrial times.
>>NOORY: Well, that's a lot too.
That's a big increase.
>>PINCHBECK: Yes, but if
we go to 2, 3 degrees,
it truly could be catastrophic.
Yeah, we're learning how meshed
together the fabric of life
is on the planet
as, unfortunately,
our industrial civilization is
kind of tearing it to shreds.
>>NOORY: You know,
mankind has been
pumping all kinds of
things into the atmosphere
since the Industrial Revolution.
In the earlier days, during
the dinosaur era and stuff,
we had a lot of CO2 too.
So those people who are against
man-made ecological change
will use those reasons to cite.
How do we argue with that?
>>PINCHBECK: What?
You mean there was more
CO2 in other epochs?
>>NOORY: Mm-hmm.
>>PINCHBECK: Well, yeah,
but the whole climate
was totally different.
I mean, we've been in
the sort of Goldilocks
period where we've been
very lucky that we've
had a few 100,000 years
with a climate that
has been very temperate and has
allowed for human civilization
to evolve in this way.
And now we've thrown things
radically out of balance.
And what I argue in
"How Soon Is Now?"
is that unless we
really undertook this
as a collective project
for the future of humanity
and the sake of
the planet, we're
probably going to go into
extinction in the next century
or so.
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
>>NOORY: When you
say extinction,
you're saying that's
it for all of us.
>>PINCHBECK: Well, I mean
the problem is that--
so for instance,
oxygen. Like, the Amazon
produces 20% of our oxygen.
The plankton in the ocean--
>>NOORY: For the whole planet?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
The plankton in
the ocean produced
60% of the oxygen
we breathe roughly.
So you know, if we go to 2
to 3 degrees Celsius warmer,
we lose about 40% of the
Amazon just from the heat.
I mean, we're already
deforesting the Amazon.
We're losing seven football
fields of jungle per minute,
according to some
estimates, every day.
So we'd lose at least
10% of our oxygen
from what happens to the Amazon.
Plus the plankton in the
ocean, their life cycle
is also being negatively
impacted by the amount of CO2
that the oceans are taking in.
So yeah, we could really
sort of asphyxiate ourselves.
And we know there's
been massive species
extinctions in the past.
It's just unfortunate because
if we were to collectively shift
this direction-- basically
what I argue in the book,
and which many non-profit
movements are now saying,
is that we need a
climate mobilization.
We need to look at what
the US did in World War II
after Pearl Harbor
bombing, when they shifted
all of the industrial
manufacturing
from everything else they were
doing-- toys, personal cars,
or whatever-- it all
went into the war effort.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>PINCHBECK: So this
would be the opposite.
It would have to be almost
a global effort where
we would say, OK,
we're all going
to sink together
unless we massively
redirect our social
powers, our creativity,
our technical capacities,
our resources to making
a regenerative system.
>>NOORY: Do you think
the planet can react
quickly once that happens?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, I
mean, some of the damage
is already locked into place.
I don't think we're going
to be able to prevent
the loss of a lot
of the coastal land
from flooding and so on
over 50 years or something.
But we don't know.
We are a very, very
creative species.
And we just have to--
you know, the smartphone
was impossible 30 years ago,
and then they figured it out.
On the negative side, the atom
bomb required this huge coming
together.
But essentially,
at the moment, we
have a political and
corporate structure
that is obstructing our capacity
to focus our energy where
it needs to focus.
And we're in kind of
like a trance of denial
about what's happening.
>>NOORY: In your book,
"How Soon is Now?"
you take a look at
this ecological crisis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>PINCHBECK: My name
is Daniel Pinchbeck.
I was born in New York City.
I'm a writer and a thinker
and sometimes an entrepreneur.
"How Soon is Now" looks
at the ecological crisis
as a kind of rite of
passage or initiation
for the human species to reach
another level of consciousness
and another level of society.
One of the main things that
compelled me to write this book
is a study of the evidence
around the ecological crisis.
We find ourselves in this
very powerful country,
if you live in the United
States, who has just
elected a president
who denies that we
are in a crisis of ecology
and climate and so on.
But the evidence from a vast
preponderance of scientists
is that we have passed a lot of
critical thresholds and tipping
points.
We're also losing 10% of the
Earth's remaining biodiversity
every 10 to 15 years.
We're losing 100 to 150 species
a day out of little more than 8
million total species.
And we now know how tightly
meshed together the web of life
is on the planet.
So as we pull it
apart, eventually it's
going to break down, and
we'll enter a different cycle
where the Earth just
won't be very hospitable
and won't support large
mammals such as ourselves.
>>NOORY: And regardless, Daniel,
of how we got there, I think
there's no argument
that it's happening.
I mean, it's obvious.
The data is the data.
Why can't we come together
as a world and say,
we have a problem--
we all admit it--
how we got to it,
that's debatable.
But let's fix--
>>PINCHBECK: It's not debatable.
>>NOORY: --but let's
fix the problem.
>>PINCHBECK: It's actually
not very debatable.
>>NOORY: Well, I know.
>>PINCHBECK: It's
very straightforward.
>>NOORY: But there is that camp
that will always fight that.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah, but that
camp happens to be not dealing
with actual evidence.
>>NOORY: But why does that
camp say and admit there
is a problem.
>>PINCHBECK: The
reason is basically
we have an operating system
for our global civilization
that's based on
corporations that
make money based on
quarterly earnings
and short-term profits.
And so if the function
of those corporations--
in a way they're like robots
or like artificial lifeforms.
They have to keep forcing
increased profits.
And the way to do that requires
getting more consumer goods,
extracting more natural
resources, and so on.
So we have an extractive and
exploitative economic model.
And that's not going to
give us the opportunity
to address the crisis we're
facing at the base level
that we have to address it at.
>>NOORY: Are we learning
anything from this disaster?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, I mean,
there's a lot of amazing things
happening--
incredible developments
and technologies, solar.
I mean, we know--
as I write in "How Soon is Now?"
I look in every area.
We know all of
the things that we
would have to do to
actually deal with this.
Like, we have to shift
from industrial farming
back to no-till
agriculture, permaculture.
They are much more
labor intensive.
We have to shift to
renewable energy obviously,
cradle to cradle manufacturing--
I mean, in every area we know
what we would need to do.
It's just that we
haven't summoned up
the collective will, and there's
a kind of blockage in people.
You know, you're just
mentioning you're
having a great granddaughter.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>PINCHBECK: Well, sadly,
unless we address this,
she's not really going to have
a world that's going to be--
>>NOORY: Yeah, what
do we give them?
>>PINCHBECK: So that
that's what I've
been trying to do in my
work over the last 10 years.
I'd written a
bestselling book, "2012."
I could have become a kind
of different type of Tony
Robbins-ish figure,
talking about how everybody
can have maximum
success and live
the secret and all that stuff.
But actually, I became much
more concerned with the fact
that our hyper-individual
culture based
on this destructive
economic system
was really killing the
planet for our descendants,
and I still really
can't fathom why
everybody's attention
hasn't shifted
in that direction at this point.
But I understand it also.
>>NOORY: Is it fixable?
>>PINCHBECK: It's
not really fixable,
but it's certainly something
that we need to address.
In the book "2012, The
Return of Quetzalcoatl,"
I also looked at it from
the more metaphysical side
of the street, like looking
at the indigenous prophecies
of cultures like the
Hopi and the Maya.
>>NOORY: Yeah, what
did they teach us?
>>PINCHBECK: What's that?
>>NOORY: What did they teach
us, these indigenous people?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, they
talked about transition.
Like, the Maya talked
about the fourth world--
the Hopi talked about
the fourth world entering
into the fifth world.
The Nahuatl, the Aztecs, talked
about the age of the fifth sun
and the age of the sixth sun.
So they understood
that we were going
to go through this intense
transformational process.
I mean, according to some
of the Aztec prophecies,
we're shifting from a sun of
light to a sun of darkness.
And in their understanding
of the cyclical movements
of energies and so
on, the sun of light
is more of a time where
waking consciousness,
rationality, interest
in the material world,
those become
mankind's fixations.
And during the time when it's
back into a sun of darkness,
it's more about the
dreamworld and the psychic,
and we realize that
reality becomes
more like a waking
dream, where it's
more permeable to our intentions
and our thoughts and so on.
So I feel many
people are grasping
this, more and more
people in Western society.
They use concepts like
synchronicity or manifestation.
So that is one element
of what's happening,
and that is fascinating to me.
But the other element is that
we have to address this system
crash that we've created.
>>NOORY: In your book
"How Soon is Now?"
you kind of tie in
human consciousness
with some of this.
How does that work?
>>PINCHBECK: In the book, I
talk about visiting a community
in Colombia,
indigenous community.
We worked with the Kogi
and the Arawak people, who
live high up in the
mountains of Colombia,
and they come down to meet us.
They walk, like, 25 hours
down from the mountain top.
>>NOORY: 25 hours?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah, yeah.
And they basically were
trying to convey to us
that from their perspective--
there's actually a really good
film about them called "The
Elder Brothers'
Warning to Humanity."
It's worth seeing.
They see themselves as an elder
civilization, like pre-Incan,
and they see our civilization
as like a younger one, immature.
But they said that,
from their perspective,
what we experience as reality
is a direct reflection
of our level of spirituality
and consciousness development.
And I think that's
very fascinating.
And when you see them,
really the elders
in that tribe, every movement
they make is very graceful.
You feel like they're
always in sacred time.
Whereas we've created this whole
idea of profane time and work
time.
And we're very rarely
in sacred time.
>>NOORY: Are they aware
of what we're doing
to the environment--
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
>>NOORY: --these
indigenous people?
How do they sense that?
How do they know it's us?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, the
indigenous people have been
aware, all around the planet--
well, first of all, I
mean, we've colonized them.
We've exploited them.
We've driven them
out of their lands.
So they understand that we are
a culture that's based on--
>>NOORY: Taking.
>>PINCHBECK: --what
the Algonquins
call "wetiko," which is kind
of like a vampiric, parasitic
consciousness, or spirit, that
seeks to exploit and devour.
And, yeah, the indigenous
cultures all around the world
have been the first
line of defense
in terms of the planet's
ecological resources--
the Ogoni people in Nigeria
who were assassinated
by the oil companies
and so on, in Ecuador,
the local tribes who were
poisoned by Texaco and so on.
>>NOORY: Sheesh.
>>PINCHBECK: Well,
but that's how
we keep our thing going, right?
Like, you flew here today.
I flew here last night.
We're part of this
whole machinery
of extraction and
exploitation, unfortunately.
>>NOORY: "How Soon is
Now?" your book, of course,
looks at a range of solutions
to the ecological emergency.
Let's take a look at this topic.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>PINCHBECK: What I seek to
offer in "How Soon is Now?"
is a blueprint for how this
transformation could happen.
How social systems
are constructed
has a lot to do with what
type of media is available.
The internet is now a new type
of media and a new phenomenon
to reorganize our society.
Democratic decision making
could be continuous.
We could all be part of some
social infrastructure, where
we make decisions
together all the time,
it's possible that capitalism is
actually a transitional system.
Capitalism has brought
the world together
into one global market.
It's unified humanity
in a certain sense.
Everyone can communicate with
each other instantaneously.
But capitalism is inherently
unstable and also unsustainable
because it constantly
forces more growth and more
development.
Now we've reached the limit
on the finite resources
of the planet.
We can't develop
like that anymore.
So we need to think about a new
model of what development is
and that form of
development would not
be more buildings, bigger
skyscrapers, more mining.
It would be creating a
society that really worked
for the individual
and provided them
with a much deeper
level of satisfaction,
cultural pursuits, maybe
explorations of eroticism even.
And I think the things that
truly make people happy
are love, community, and the
ability to give their gifts
and feel that they have purpose
and meaning in their lives.
There's nature, and then
there's human constructs.
And those human
constructs, we actually
have the ability to
redesign, rewrite, revise.
We just forget that
we have that power.
One of the most
crucial things is
going to be kind of
reinventing community, creating
local communities
or joining community
groups as a way of breaking
through the separation
and the alienation that our
capitalist culture has created.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NOORY: In a
scene where you had
some young people all sitting
around together in a circle,
will our youth carry the torch
and help fix this problem?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, that's
definitely happening right now.
And I'm sure you've heard
about Greta Thunberg?
>>NOORY: Mm-hmm.
>>PINCHBECK: So she's a
16-year-old Swedish high school
student who, I think she has
a little bit of Asperger's
syndrome, and I believe
one of her ancestors
actually was the one who
discovered the greenhouse
syndrome, greenhouse gases.
And she started this
movement that now you
have probably
hundreds of thousands
of kids who are beginning
to move into direct action,
recognizing that their
future is in jeopardy,
and that the, quote,
unquote, "adults in the room"
are not capable of doing
what needs to be done.
They've been stepping forward.
I think that's something
that's going to become more
powerful in the next few years.
There's no place else
for us to go right now.
And in a way, kids
are more aware
because it's their
future extends further
into this disaster
that we've created.
>>NOORY: Or do they
fall into this trap
where they become more
corporatized and they change?
>>PINCHBECK: I think
it's too late for that.
I mean, honestly, we're in
an existential risk situation
right now.
There's this
interesting movement
called Extinction
Rebellion, which
was started in the
UK, which they just
had 1,000 people arrested
recently in London.
You know, people are
beginning to wake up
to recognize that this is not
business as usual anymore.
This is existential.
>>NOORY: Well, until we
can move off the planet,
this is it for us right now,
and we got to make it work.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah,
moving off the planet
is an extravagantly
difficult endeavor.
And I think that if we
can't make it work here,
where all of the conditions for
life are remarkably perfect,
it's like--
Buckminster Fuller talked
about this as Spaceship Earth.
It's like we're
actually on a spaceship.
We've woken up.
We're the crew of
this spaceship.
Everything we need
is provided for us,
except we don't have
an instruction manual.
So that's what we're
trying to figure out.
Yeah, if we can't
make it work here,
we're not going to make
it work anywhere else.
I think space is just a
fantasy at this point.
>>NOORY: When I think
of Buckminster Fuller,
I think of the geodesic
dome that he created.
But he was much more elaborate
than just that, wasn't he?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
He basically looked at
how nature builds things.
And he and he realized
that nature basically
never uses right angles.
And so humans are always seeking
to kind of like dominate,
control nature, put on these
right angles and so on.
And so he wanted to create
a whole system of design
that was more in accord
with nature's principles.
That's the geodesic dome,
and a lot of his other work
came out of that.
And there's a whole
legacy of his work.
There's the Buckminster
Fuller Institute.
There's thousands of
ecological designers
around the world who are
creating new ideas based
on his principles.
>>NOORY: What would
you do, Daniel,
to start making
this change where
you would feel comfortable
that something's working here?
>>PINCHBECK: You
know, the easiest way
would be for a major social
network like Facebook or Google
to recognize that this is
the situation that we're
in because Facebook can reach
2 billion people in a minute.
>>NOORY: And instantly.
>>PINCHBECK: You know, they
could simply on their home page
say, dear human
family, we recognize
that we've entered an
ecological emergency together,
and we're going to have to
make significant changes
in the way we live our lives.
This is going to be including
growing food locally, learning
bioremediation, learning
permaculture, not doing
things that are destructive
for the environment,
redesigning our
manufacturing systems,
training people to
install renewable energy.
And we're going to put
all the tools for all
of that available online.
Everyone will access
this, and we'll also
create a decision-making
system using the internet
that everybody can help
make local decisions,
regional decisions, and even
planetary decisions better.
>>NOORY: So you would use
new technology, social media,
as a platform to help
get this word out?
>>PINCHBECK: Yes.
I mean, I think that's our
best option because in a sense,
the internet points towards
the capacity for us to--
a tool like Facebook
is so incredible.
It points towards how
we can all be connected.
We can all find each other now.
But it restricts our
capacity to use it
for regenerative social purposes
unfortunately because they're
trapped in a limited
profit-making model.
>>NOORY: You have looked at
blockchain, where of course
Bitcoin comes from.
You think that has
some effect on what
we can do in the future?
>>PINCHBECK:
Blockchain is complex.
You know, Bitcoin
has pros and cons.
>>NOORY: Right, it's scary.
>>PINCHBECK: What's that?
>>NOORY: It's scary
as an investment.
You don't know what's
going to happen.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah,
it's kind of--
the whole thing is very
interesting, very speculative.
Some of it will become
just infrastructure
because it's a way
for supply chains
to track all their
dealings and so on.
Or for philanthropy,
it's interesting.
There's a tool called Giveth.io,
where if you put money in,
you can track it all the
way down to like, oh, look,
I bought this pencil for this
African refugee or something.
So I think there's some really
interesting uses for it.
And it's good that some
of the hype has dissolved.
>>NOORY: What's
fascinating about it
is it's been created not by
institutions, but by people,
and people are
driving it right now.
>>PINCHBECK: That's true.
And also, you know, for
democratic decision making,
there's one group, a great one,
called Democracy Not Earth.
And the idea is to
really create tools
that would allow people to
make ongoing decisions together
in a new way.
>>NOORY: Tell me about
the Tamera in Portugal.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah,
so Tamera in Portugal
is a community that I've visited
a few times that basically it's
started by German radicals.
They were trying to figure out
why the great utopian movements
of the '60s didn't succeed--
like the green movement and
so on and the left and so on--
and so they began to realize
that underlying everything were
core issues of
love and sexuality
that led to communities to
collapse, the jealousies
to envies.
So they call themselves
a Peace Research Center.
And that's really
what they're about.
But they say that we're never
going to have peace on Earth
until we have peace between
the genders and peace and love.
And for them, that
involves developing
a whole new social model for
how relationships are organized.
That includes, like,
most people there are
in multi-partner relationships.
Everything that people
do in the private realm
is actually expressed in the
public sphere and community
forums, community gatherings.
It's a very interesting--
it's like you definitely
feel that it's
a different world when
you go there, that they've
created their own new culture.
And they do peace marches
in Guatemala, peace work
in Israel and
Palestine and so on.
But, yeah, I'm
fascinated by them.
And I'm fascinated by it.
As I said, it's like I
feel that it's not just
reforming the current system.
There's a deeper level system
change that needs to happen,
and so we need
templates for that,
both on how organizations
can work collaboratively
and how communities maybe can
deal with sexuality and love
in different ways
because obviously we're
seeing a lot of chaos
around that right now.
>>NOORY: As you mentioned,
during the 60s, of course,
was love and peace
and everything else.
That fizzled, didn't it?
>>PINCHBECK: Well,
love and peace,
it turns out, require
an infrastructure.
You need a structure that
allows that to succeed.
You can't just
impose love and peace
on a military
domination-based empire
that's based on extraction
and exploitation of resources.
It doesn't work.
>>NOORY: No.
I mean, we saw what
happened at Tiananmen Square
with love and peace.
It just doesn't work sometimes.
>>PINCHBECK: My hope would be
that if you could demonstrate
models for the future that
really made people happier,
then you could get
everybody onboard.
>>NOORY: Tell me about
your book, "2012,
The Return of Quetzalcoatl."
>>PINCHBECK: So
that book was really
an effort to understand
the indigenous cultures
all around the world
who see this time as one
of intense transformation.
And I was looking at
the Mayan calendar,
which the Long Count of the
Tzolkin, a 5,100-year cycle,
ended in 2012.
We're in the next cycle.
I was looking at the Hopi.
I visited them in Arizona.
I was looking at
other phenomenon that
seemed to relate, like the crop
circles in England, which often
had information related
to the Mayan calendar
and so on embedded in them.
And, yeah, I do think that
we're in the process of going
through this intense
transformation as a species.
And all these different
factors are at play.
I mean, the development
of esoteric knowledge
and how everyone now does yoga,
knows about Kabbalah and Sufism
and so on, and that's
moving around the world.
The rapid accelerated evolution
of technologies that we now
can communicate with everybody.
And we can potentially scale
up renewable energy systems
or whatever we need to do
to help save the planet--
distributed manufacturing,
automation so that we can
liberate people from drudgery.
That's the sad thing.
It's like if we were to
make this systemic change
and create this new
operating system now,
we could actually look
forward to a future
that really liberates
humanity from a lot of misery,
where people are really free
to cultivate themselves,
to explore their
unique individuality,
express themselves.
It's just we're in this
bifurcation moment right now.
But anyway, yeah, so
"2012" looked at it
at more of a
metaphysical level--
like, what does this shift mean
in terms of psychic realities,
consciousness, philosophy?
And "How Soon is Now?" is
more on a pragmatic level.
How would we bring about this
change on a systems level?
>>NOORY: Daniel, ironically,
we're in the Gaia studios.
And Gaia, of course,
meaning that this planet is
a living organism-- it's alive.
Do you think that's true,
that this planet truly
is alive like we are right now?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, I think it's
alive but maybe in a slightly
different way than we are.
You know, there may
be a lot of things
that have forms of
consciousness in ways
that we don't quite
understand yet.
I mean, the ancients all
thought that the sun--
they worship the sun
because they saw the sun
as an immense, sentient being.
>>NOORY: They may be right.
>>PINCHBECK: Well, I think they
might be right yeah, actually.
Because if you think
about how the solar rays
and the solar cycles
and how that influences
the development, I
mean, maybe the sun
and the Earth and
the other planets
are in this very
complex interplay,
and there is a level of
awareness or intelligence
beyond what we can
understand that's operative.
That's also-- ayahuasca, which
is the subject of my new book,
"When Plants Dream,"
that's also--
>>NOORY: I love that
title, by the way.
>>PINCHBECK: Thank you so much.
Yeah, that's also
very much a message
that one gets from
drinking ayahuasca,
that the planet
is alive, that it
has an evolutionary
trajectory, that we're
part of this
evolutionary trajectory,
and that the whole thing
is very sacred in a way.
>>NOORY: Graham Hancock, one
of our dear friends, of course,
talked about your
book way back in 2010.
>>GRAHAM HANCOCK: Is it possible
to summarize in relatively few
words what the essential
thesis of your book "2012"
is and also the subtitle, "The
Return of Quetzalcoatl?" "
Why that subtitle?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah, well,
I'll start with the subtitle.
Quetzalcoatl is a Aztec
name for a creator deity
who's known in the Mayan
language as Kukulkan.
And it's the feathered
serpent, the plumed serpent.
So it's the meeting of
the bird and the snake,
which also could be seen
as the meeting of heaven
and earth, air and
matter, spirit and matter.
But also what I
argue in the book
as a theory is it
could also symbolize
the integration of previously
seemingly opposed opposites--
in this case, the
Western materialist
scientific knowledge
system, which
would be kind of the Earth,
the material-based one,
with more of this intuitive,
Shamanic or Eastern
mystical way of knowing reality.
And I think that as these
two forms of knowing
are melding and coming together.
It's leading towards this
next form of consciousness.
So that was one element,
and the other element was--
>>HANCOCK: That's the return--
>>PINCHBECK: The
return of Quetzalcoatl.
>>HANCOCK: --that's
what's symbolizing that?
>>PINCHBECK: Symbolizing, yeah.
And then the other element for
me personally was an experience
that I'd had in Brazil, on
the Amazon, where I received
this transmission of prophecy.
There was a voice
speaking in my head
that proclaimed that
it was Quetzalcoatl,
that this was the apocalypse,
that I had this mission
to get out these
ideas and information
and stuff like that.
So it had resonance for me
both symbolically and then more
of this personal experience.
>>NOORY: How many people
get what we just saw,
you and Graham
Hancock talking about?
How many people really
understand what's going on?
>>PINCHBECK: I have no clue.
I don't know if I do.
[LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: That's honest.
You better.
>>PINCHBECK: I go in and out.
I mean, sometimes I
toggle back, you know,
because I had all these
incredible visionary
experiences and
synchronicities, and everything
seemed to be building to
some type of amazing thing,
and then that sort
of melts away.
Then I'm back in my
small New York apartment,
trying to figure
out what's next.
>>NOORY: For a guy who's
so earthy and concerned
about the planet, what
are you doing in New York?
There's no grass.
It's all pavement.
>>PINCHBECK: Well, I mean,
I'm indigenous to New York.
I grew up there.
>>NOORY: I mean,
I love New York.
But I would think
I would see you
in Montana or
Oregon or something.
>>PINCHBECK: I'm not really--
I'm an urban bohemian and
an intellectual or whatever.
I'm not really a
nature person, per se.
I love cities.
I love the density of them,
and I grew up in them.
My dad was an artist.
My mother was a
writer and an artist.
So yeah, it's my
natural habitat.
I'm not really
some nature person.
The reason I'm talking about all
this stuff around the ecology
is that I have a daughter.
You have a granddaughter.
Whatever is going
on in our brains,
we are actually missing
the plot here because if we
don't actually deal--
and that unfortunately would
need substantive changes
to everybody's lifestyle.
>>NOORY: Oh, dramatic changes.
>>PINCHBECK: Like,
we'd have to reel back
in a lot of the excess.
Maybe you'd have to shoot
this on Skype or something
rather than flying every week.
I'm only doing this--
and I wish, as I
said, at this point,
I wish I'd just gone the Tony
Robbins route and been like,
yeah, we could all
have incredible lives.
Again, the other sad
thing is the excess
that the Western world
has used has really
cost the developing world.
Like Bangladesh, let's
say, 170 million people who
live very close to sea level.
They are the ones who are
most likely to be wiped out
as the seas start to rise
because they're not going
to be able to farm and so on.
That's really us who did that.
The US used something
like 25% or more
of the Earth's
resources and carbon.
Europe also used a lot.
Even though China and India
and so on are now catching up,
we're very much responsible
for a lot of what's
happened to the
planet, and we're still
not taking responsibility.
In fact, we've elected
somebody who represents
like total irresponsibility.
So we have to take this as
something very personal.
>>NOORY: There was
an area, I think
it might have been India,
where a quarter million
farmers committed suicide
because they weren't
happy with the way their crops
were coming because they were
genetically modified
and everything else.
That's horrible.
>>PINCHBECK: Well, yeah,
corporations have unfortunately
been willing to do a lot
of things for profit--
whether it's denying
generic AIDS drugs to Africa
or giving Indian
farmers seeds that
have to be rebought
every year and so on.
>>NOORY: Sure, or
cancer-causing herbicides.
>>PINCHBECK: You know,
it just shows you
how ridiculous the
system is because we
have these incredible
technologies,
and we could be
sharing them, but we
can't do it under the current
economic political model.
>>NOORY: When you look at where
you've come over the last years
since your books
have been coming out,
have you changed too?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah,
I'm still going
through a lot of changing.
>>NOORY: You are?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
>>NOORY: In what direction?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, one thing is,
in the wake of the whole MeToo
movement, addressing my own
areas of toxic masculinity
and facing that and
realizing that I
made a lot of mistakes
in how I dealt
with women and the feminine.
That's been a major
ongoing area that I've
been seeking to address.
And then also, in a way,
I'm in a more nebulous zone
of uncertainty
because I was trying
to start a whole company
and a movement, Evolver.
Then that, for
whatever reasons--
I mean, it's still going, but
I'm not actively involved.
So I'm kind of open to
the mystery at this point.
>>NOORY: You had mentioned
earlier about crop formations.
And of course, they're
all over the planet.
What's your take on that?
Who's doing these things?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah, well,
I definitely think that--
I spent one solid
summer and then
part of another
summer in Glastonbury
going to them as they
popped up and researching,
talking to all the people
involved with them.
And I do think that there's
a non-human intelligence--
>>NOORY: You do?
>>PINCHBECK: --that
is involved with this.
There's some higher
form of intelligence
that is using this as a
medium for communication
and a very playful one.
And it seems to be in a way--
what I took from
it, after spending
so much time looking
at it, was it's
like a kind of a teaching
on the nature of reality
and the nature of
consciousness and giving us
these very gentle hints
about the importance
of sacred geometries,
the importance of symbols
from ancient cultures and so on.
>>NOORY: But you do think
it's an ET presence?
>>PINCHBECK: Well, I don't know.
I think ET is a
complicated word.
I think that there
may be other levels
of galactic intelligence,
and there also
may be other dimensions.
We know that, according
to contemporary physics,
they talk about there being
10 dimensions of space time.
What we're experiencing now
is the fourth dimension.
If there were forms
of consciousness
that were in the sixth
or seventh dimension,
they would be able to
potentially move through time
as we move through space.
They might be us in
another dimension
in what we call the future.
But they would just be
existing in their relationship
to their dimensional reality.
We've tended to make a very
literalistic and reductive
discussion around subjects
like ETs and so on,
and it may be much more complex.
>>NOORY: What about the
possibility, Daniel,
that this planet--
again, the Gaia Theory--
is alive, and it's the
planet sending us messages.
That's how it
communicates with us--
through these formations.
>>PINCHBECK: Right.
That doesn't really
make sense to me.
I mean, I think the
planet communicates
to us through flowers and
bumblebees and streams
and clouds and so on.
>>NOORY: And mosquitoes.
>>PINCHBECK: And mosquitoes
and ticks and moles and snakes.
I don't think the planet
needs to communicate
with us through these types
of geometric patterns.
These suggest more
of an ordered,
kind of civilizational
imposition in a way.
>>NOORY: In your new book, of
course, "When Plants Dream,"
you talk about the global
spread of ayahuasca.
Tell us what it
is, first of all.
What is ayahuasca,
and what does it do?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah, so ayahuasca
is a visionary potion from
the Amazon basin, a tea in a
sense that's usually brewed
together from two
different plants--
the ayahuasca vine,
Banisteriopsis caapi,
which contains certain compounds
that are like harmaline,
which are MAO inhibitors.
And then you have the leaves
of the chacruna, which
contain Psychotria
viridis, which contain
Dimethyltryptamine, or GMT DMT.
DMT, if you try to eat it, it's
normally inactivated by enzymes
But if you put it
together in this potion,
then it can be taken in.
>>NOORY: Do you drink it?
>>PINCHBECK: You drink it.
Usually the ceremonies
are all night.
Usually you have a
shaman or a group of them
who preside over it.
Often they're singing.
Often there's healing rituals--
prayers, tobacco, chanting.
And you know, many
people find this
to be a very, very powerful
and profound experience--
in some cases, a
very healing one.
>>NOORY: Does it knock you out?
>>PINCHBECK: It knocks you down.
Definitely you're in a different
state of consciousness.
You're conscious.
You're awake.
But it's almost like
you're in like a--
>>NOORY: A different zone?
>>PINCHBECK: --visionary
dream cocoon,
where you're seeing into
these other realities.
And sound has an
incredible effect on you,
or smell, or whatever.
>>NOORY: Everything's enhanced?
>>PINCHBECK: Everything
is enhanced, yeah.
>>NOORY: Would you get in a
car and drive after doing this?
>>PINCHBECK: After doing
it, you could, sure.
In fact, the next
day most people
feel really very
much in their bodies.
And also the MAO inhibitors
that the ayahuasca vine
contains have a natural
antidepressant effect.
So they really lift your
spirits, often generally.
>>NOORY: You're a little more
energetic and everything else.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
And I'm not saying that
it's for everybody.
Everybody has an individual
decision around it you.
It is a very
profound experience.
It can be jarring.
So it's an individual decision.
>>NOORY: We have
a program on Gaia
called "Psychedelica" which
addresses this exact topic.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> Deep in the
heart of the Amazon,
out of generations of indigenous
people from mysterious origins,
birth from a specific
combination of plants comes
a visionary experience, an
ancient healing tradition--
modern controversy
and massive interest
from younger generations all
surrounding a sacred brew
called ayahuasca, a
beverage that contains DMT.
DMT is a tryptamine that
even our brain produces.
But the chacruna leaves
contains much more.
Left alone, this molecule
will be metabolized
before having any effect.
So the sacred vine is
added to protect its entry
through the body into the
brain and into our experience.
From scientists to
shamans, many theories
abound regarding the strange
effects of ayahuasca.
And yet it still is
not fully understood.
>>DENNIS MCKENNA:
So ayahuasca is--
it's a whole bunch of things,
but on the nuts and bolts
level, it's a beverage.
It's made from two plants
at least, one of which
contains Dimethyltryptamine.
At the cultural level, it's
much broader than that.
These are essentially
shamanic practices,
and ayahuasca is at
the center of that kind
of traditional medicine,
which is really
a mind-body kind of medicine.
>>NOORY: Daniel, is ayahuasca
legal in this country, or is
it considered a narcotic?
What is it?
>>PINCHBECK: The
legality is something
that we track in the book.
And it's actually quite complex.
There's a couple
of religions that
started in Brazil
in the 1920s that
are syncretic religions,
that mix together
Christian and
indigenous elements.
One of them is called
Uniao do Vegetales,
and they actually won a Supreme
Court case a number of years
ago allowing them to use their
ayahuasca tea as a sacrament.
Based on that decision,
a court in Oregon
allowed another
religion, Santo Daime,
to have protection for
their use of the sacrament.
And at the moment, there
seems to be a general sense
that it's OK.
People have been
advertising publicly.
This guy in Florida has been
very public about putting
Facebook ads on about it.
And it seems like
as long as there's
some type of religious
connection, sacramental use
of it, it seems like it's
being allowed at this point.
But it's still a gray area.
>>NOORY: If you were driving
and got stopped by police,
and you had a little container
of it, what would they do?
>>PINCHBECK: They
wouldn't know what it was.
It's a very minor--
I mean, it's not
meth or anything.
A very small group of
people are doing it,
and they're doing
it in ceremony.
You're not going
to do it and drive.
It's just not going to happen.
It would be a very stupid idea.
>>NOORY: But it seems to
enhance your abilities
for all kinds of things.
Does it make you more intuitive?
>>PINCHBECK: Yes.
I think it can help you
enhance your intuition.
What I've been very fascinated,
which we track in the book
also, is how some people who
are very successful or come
from wealthy backgrounds,
the ayahuasca
really changes their thinking
about how they use their power
in relationship to the planet.
So for instance, we
talked about there
was a CEO who was running
a soft drink company.
He drank ayahuasca,
and then he realized
that he didn't wanted
to do something
that was just sugar drinks
that were for mass consumption.
>>NOORY: He changed?
>>PINCHBECK: So
he shifted to more
of a health-based product that
had more herbal benefits and so
on.
>>NOORY: He probably
ended up making more money
in the long run.
>>PINCHBECK: Well that's
also arguably possible.
But it does seem to really--
it's a powerful tool both
for inner exploration,
for discovering that there
maybe are these other layers
or dimensions of
spiritual reality.
And then also for
some people, it really
helps them to address, yeah,
how they use their resources--
recalibrate based on
having a deeper connection
to the Gaian intelligence
of the planet, perhaps.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Your first book was called,
"Breaking Open the Head?"
>>PINCHBECK: "Breaking
Open the Head."
>>NOORY: Which dealt with this.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah, that
book was an overview.
So that really was about
my own journeys, discovery
starting in my late 20s.
I was a journalist,
and I went through
a spiritual existential crisis.
I remembered that I had taken
LSD and mushrooms in college
and decided to explore that.
But this was back in
the 1990s in New York,
and you couldn't even talk
about psychedelics in public
without people laughing at you.
Or if I brought it
up to my friends
who were journalists or
editors or whatever--
>>NOORY: It was
too "foo-foo" then.
>>PINCHBECK: Yes.
There had been a
huge cultural effort
to ridicule psychedelics,
to make them seem absurd.
Once they were outlawed
in the '60s and '70s, you
couldn't even--
basically science had
made them totally taboo.
So basically from the early
'70s to the late '90s,
there were basically no
tests using human subjects
with psychedelics,
even though in the '50s
psychologists were
talking about them
as the most incredible
tools we had ever
found for studying the
human mind and so on.
So it's only in
the last 15 years,
actually since "Breaking
Open the Head" came out,
and I think that
that book may have
helped to shift the
cultural tonality maybe
around the psychedelics.
Now we're seeing this massive
psychedelic Renaissance,
and the discoveries
are really amazing.
>>NOORY: I think
mushrooms are now
legal in this state,
Colorado, aren't they?
>>PINCHBECK: I think it's--
is it just in Denver, maybe?
>>NOORY: Maybe.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah, that just
happened a few weeks ago.
That's extraordinary.
And they've done
some great studies.
Johns Hopkins did a study where
they gave mushrooms to people
who'd never had a psychedelic
experience before,
then over a series of years
charted them-- you know,
went back to them and did
psychological testing--
and found that people
remembered them
as one of the greatest
experiences of their lives,
in parallel with the
birth of their first child
or their wedding, and had
permanent positive changes
to their psychological makeup.
So for instance, they
permanently had more openness
to new experience as a factor.
So that's very exciting.
We're seeing treatments for
obsessive compulsive disorder,
for depression.
>>NOORY: Autism?
>>PINCHBECK: Autism is an
interesting possibility.
In the book on
ayahuasca, we found
a researcher who's
demonstrated that ayahuasca
can help actually grow new
brain cells, neurogenesis.
>>NOORY: That's dramatic.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
So that might have really
interesting implications
down the line when we
can isolate some of that.
>>NOORY: PTSD-- huge problem
with our military, huge problem
with individuals as well.
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah.
So MAPS has been running
clinical trials with MDMA
for treating
post-traumatic stress
disorder in veterans from the
Iraq and Afghanistan wars.
And I think they've had
something like a 60% success
rate where you give MDMA in
therapy-assisted sessions
three times.
And you don't even
really do that much.
You just wait for the
repressed emotions
and experiences to surface
and hold container for them.
And ayahuasca, actually
there's a wonderful film
that just came out
called "From Shock
to Awe" which traces
some Iraq war veterans.
And they show these
huge medicine cabinets
full of all these
pharmaceuticals and so on.
>>NOORY: Horrible, yeah.
>>PINCHBECK: And then they drink
ayahuasca for a few months,
so they just throw
away all those pills.
>>NOORY: Throw the
other stuff out--
that's dramatic.
Can it hurt you
at all, ayahuasca?
>>PINCHBECK: So like any
powerful psychoactive
or psychedelic, it
has the potential to--
I don't know if it can
cause psychological harm
or if it really just
opens up maybe stuff
that you'd repressed or so on.
But I do know people who've had
psychological breakdowns after.
But it's very rare, but it
does happen where people end up
in a mental institution.
>>NOORY: Maybe
they had too much?
>>PINCHBECK: Or they
maybe drank too much
in a short period
of time or whatever.
We're really just
learning about it.
But we also do have to remember
that even in the Amazon,
it's not like everybody
would take ayahuasca.
Often, it was really only
the shamans who would do it,
and they would diagnose
their patients.
But then also when you
took these types of things,
they were initiations.
Initiations are
meant to be scary.
It's like you're going into this
liminal world between the life
and death--
into the spirit world
to get knowledge,
to mature, to understand.
And those are
dangerous journeys,
and sometimes they can
cause negative consequences.
>>NOORY: Daniel, if
you had a magic wand,
and you could just wave it over
the planet, what would that
wish be with that wand?
What would you
like to see happen?
>>PINCHBECK: Yeah,
I think we need--
I've mentioned Extinction
Rebellion and the Sunrise
Movement before--
we basically need a mass
global citizen movement,
you could say an uprising
or rebellion to some sense--
not a violent one, not
a destructive one--
but to recognize that
the system is broken,
and if we continue
along this path,
we're going to bring
about our own extinction.
And therefore, we have a very
small window of opportunity
to redesign our operating
system so that we
shift from exploitation and
extraction and domination
to really working to create
a regenerative system
on a planetary scale.
>>NOORY: How much
time do we have?
>>PINCHBECK: I think we better
get to it the next five years.
>>NOORY: That soon?
>>PINCHBECK: Well,
I mean, that's
what all the science
is telling us.
It couldn't be more clear.
We're in big trouble right now.
>>NOORY: Daniel, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>PINCHBECK: Thanks
for having me.
>>NOORY: I really appreciate it.
>>PINCHBECK: Nice
to talk to you.
>>NOORY: And for people who
want more information on what
you do, how do they find you?
>>PINCHBECK: I'm on all
the normal channels--
Instagram, Twitter,
Daniel Pinchbeck,
Facebook, Daniel Pinchbeck.
I guess those are the ways.
Pinchbeck.io is my website.
They can message me there.
We have howsoonisnow.info
is for my last book.
>>NOORY: Daniel, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief,"
really appreciate it.
>>PINCHBECK: Thanks
for having me.
>>NOORY: So as Daniel
has said, we've
got five years to really
start fixing this.
Let's start right now.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]